== CsvPirate v2.0.1 (20091001)

Easily create CSVs of any data that can be derived from your models.

CsvPirate is the easy way to create a CSV of essentially anything in Rails, in full pirate regalia.
It works better if you are wearing a tricorne!

CsvPirate only works for commissions of swag OR grub!

Initialize method (a.k.a new()) takes a hash of params:

  swag:         the ARrr collection of swag to work on (optional)
  grub:         the ARrr class that the spyglasses will be used on (optional)
  spyglasses:   named scopes in your model that will refine the rows in the CSV according to conditions of the spyglass,
                  and order them according to the order of the spyglass (only used with grub, not swag)
  booty:        booty on your model that you want printed in the CSV
  chart:        name of directory where you want to hide your loot
  waggoner:     name of document where you will give detailed descriptions of the loot
  chronometer:  keeps track of when you hunt for treasure
  gibbet:       filename spacer after the date, and before the iterative counter/timestamp.  MuST contain a '.'
  swab:         can be :counter, :timestamp, or :none
    :counter    - default, each successive run will create a new file using a counter
    :timestamp  - each successive run will create a new file using a HHMMSS time stamp
    :none       - no iterative file naming convention, just use waggoner and aft
  mop:          can be :clean or :dirty (:overwrite or :append) (only has an effect if :swab is :none) since overwriting is irrelevant for a new file
    :clear      - do not use :counter or :timestamp, and instead overwrite the file
    :dirty      - do not use :counter, or :timestamp, or :overwrite.  Just keep adding on.

The create method has the same parameters, and actually creates the CSV.

Avast! Here be pirates! To brush up on pirate coding naming conventions:

  http://www.privateerdragons.com/pirate_dictionary.html

Perhaps the next version will have CSV importing abilities...

== On The Web

Source:
  http://github.com/pboling/csv_pirate

Release Announcement:
  http://galtzo.blogspot.com/2009/03/csv-pirate.html


== Installation

Gem Using Git building from source:

  mkdir -p ~/src
  cd ~/src
  git clone git://github.com/pboling/csv_pirate.git
  cd csv_pirate
  gem build csv_pirate.gemspec
  sudo gem install csv_pirate-2.0.1.gem # (Or whatever version gets built)

Then cd to your rails app to optionally freeze the gem into your app:

  rake gems:freeze GEM=csv_pirate

Installing Gem from Github's Gem Server:

  sudo gem install pboling-csv_pirate -s http://gems.github.com

Plugin using Git:

  ruby script/plugin install git://github.com/pboling/csv_pirate.git


== Example & Usage

Assuming a Make (as in manufacturers of automobiles) model like this:

  # == Schema Information
  #
  # Table name: makes
  #
  #  id      :integer(4)      not null, primary key
  #  name    :string(255)
  #  factory :string(255)
  #  sales   :integer(4)
  #

  class Make < ActiveRecord::Base
    has_many :vehicle_models
    named_scope :factory_in_germany, :conditions => ["factory = ?", "Germany"]

    has_csv_pirate_ship :spyglasses => [:factory_in_germany],
                        :booty => [:id, :name]
  end

To create a csv of the names and ids of makes with factories in germany:

  Make.walk_the_plank  # Get it? HA! If you can't believe I wrote this whole thing JUST to be able to make jokes like that... check ma sources :)

The name of the csv that comes out will be (by defualt located in log directory):

  Make.20090930.export.13.csv

Where Make is the class, 20090930 is today's date, .export is the gibbet, and 13 is the iterative file counter, meaning I've run this export 13 times today.

All of those filename parts are customizable to a degree.

You can also customize the CSV, for example if you want to add a column to the csv:

  Make.walk_the_plank({:booty => [:id, :name, :sales]})
  Make.walk_the_plank({:booty => [:id, :name, :sales], :spyglasses => [:all], :swab => :timestamp})
  Make.walk_the_plank({:booty => [:id, :name, :sales], :spyglasses => [:all], :swab => :none, :mop => :dirty})

If you have a method in the Make class like this:

  def to_slug
    "#{self.name}_#{self.id}"
  end

getting it in the CSV is easy peasy:

  Make.walk_the_plank({:booty => [:id, :name, :to_slug]})

Add whatever methods you want to the :booty array.  Write new methods, and add them!  Make lots of glorious CSVs full of data to impress the pointy ones in the office.

You can also use the raw CsvPirate class itself directly wherever you want.  These are the available options to methods:
new, create, or walk_the_plank

  # CsvPirate only works for commissions of swag OR grub!
  # :swag         the ARrr collection of swag to work on (optional)
  # :grub         the ARrr class that the spyglasses will be used on (optional)
  # :spyglasses   named scopes in your model that will refine the rows in the CSV according to conditions of the spyglasses,
  #                 and order them according to the order of the spyglasses (optional)
  # :booty        booty (columns/methods) on your model that you want printed in the CSV, also used to create the figurehead (CSV header)
  # :chart        name of directory where you want to hide your loot
  # :wagonner     name of document where you will give detailed descriptions of the loot
  # :aft          filename extention ('.csv')
  # :chronometer  keeps track of when you hunt for treasure
  # :gibbet       filename spacer after the date, and before the iterative counter/timestamp.  MuST contain a '.'
  # :swab         can be :counter, :timestamp, or :none
  #   :counter - default, each successive run will create a new file using a counter
  #   :timestamp - each successive run will create a new file using a HHMMSS time stamp
  #   :none - no iterative file naming convention, just use waggoner and aft
  # :mop          can be :clean or :dirty (:overwrite or :append) (only has an effect if :swab is :none) since overwriting is irrelevant for a new file
  #   :clear - do not use :counter or :timestamp, and instead overwrite the file
  #   :dirty - do not use :counter, or :timestamp, or :overwrite.  Just keep adding on.

The following two sets of code are identical:

  csv_pirate = CsvPirate.new({
    :grub => User,
    :spyglasses => [:active,:logged_in],
    :waggoner => 'active_users_logged_in',
    :booty => ["id","number","login","created_at"],
    :chart => 'log/csv/'
  })
  csv_pirate.hoist_mainstay() # creates CSV file and writes out the rows

  CsvPirate.create({
    :grub => User,
    :spyglasses => [:active,:logged_in],
    :waggoner => 'active_users_logged_in',
    :booty => ["id","number","login","created_at"],
    :chart => 'log/csv/'
  })# creates CSV file and writes out the rows

Another example using swag instead of grub:

  users = User.logged_out.inactive
  csv_pirate = CsvPirate.new({
    :swag => users,
    :waggoner => 'inactive_users_not_logged_in',
    :booty => ["id","number","login","created_at"],
    :chart => 'log/csv/'
  })
  csv_pirate.hoist_mainstay()

Then if you want to get your hands on the loot immediately:

  csv_pirate.weigh_anchor()

For those who can't help but copy/paste into console and then edit:

  csv_pirate = CsvPirate.new({:grub => User,:spyglasses => [:active,:logged_in],:waggoner => 'active_users_logged_in',:booty => ["id","number","login","created_at"],:chart => 'log/csv/'})

OR

  csv_pirate = CsvPirate.new({:swag => users,:waggoner => 'inactive_users_not_logged_in',:booty => ["id","number","login","created_at"],:chart => 'log/csv/'})

== Advanced Example with Nested Methods

You have a VehicleModel class and the same Make class as up above:

  # == Schema Information
  #
  # Table name: vehicle_models
  #
  #  id         :integer(4)      not null, primary key
  #  name       :string(255)
  #  year       :integer(4)
  #  horsepower :integer(4)
  #  price      :integer(4)
  #  electric   :boolean(1)
  #  make_id    :integer(4)
  #

  class VehicleModel < ActiveRecord::Base
    belongs_to :make
    has_csv_pirate_ship :booty => [:id, :name, :year,
                                   {:make => :name},
                                   {:tires => {:size => {:width => :inches}}}]
    def tires; TireSize.new; end
  end

  class TireSize
    # To call an instance method you need to return an instance
    def size; TireWidth.new; end
  end

  class TireWidth
    # To call a class method you need to return the class object
    def width; Measurement; end
  end

  class Measurement
    def self.inches; 13; end
  end

Then to create the CSV:

  a = VehicleModel.walk_the_plank

Then check the output from the console:

  a.weigh_anchor

  id,name,year,makename,tiressizewidthinches
  1,Cavalier,1999,Chevrolet,13
  2,Trailblazer,2006,Chevrolet,13
  3,Corvette,2010,Chevrolet,13
  4,Mustang,1976,Ford,13
  5,Lebaron,1987,Chrysler,13
  6,Avalon,1996,Toyota,13
  => #<File:/Users/pboling/RubymineProjects/empty_csv_pirate_app/log/VehicleModel.20091001.export.2.csv (closed)>

Joy to recursive code everywhere!

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Author: Peter Boling, peter.boling at gmail dot com
  Copyright (c) 2009 Peter H. Boling of 9thBit LLC, released under the MIT license.  See LICENSE for details.
